# 664. Strange Printer
***Topics***: *Dynamic Programming, Recursion*  
***Difficulty***: <span style="color: #f8615c;">Hard</span>
<!-- green: #46c6c2, yellow: #fac31d, red: #f8615c-->
---
There is a strange printer with the following two special properties:

- The printer can only print a sequence of the same character each time.
- At each turn, the printer can print new characters starting from and ending at any place and will cover the original existing characters.  

Given a string `s`, return the minimum number of turns the printer needed to print it.

---
**Example 1:**  

Input: `s = "aaabbb"`  
Output: `2`  
Explanation: `Print 'aaa' first then print 'bbb'.`  

**Example 2:**  

Input: `s = "aba"`  
Output: `2`  
Explanation: `Print "aaa" first and then print "b" from the second place of the string, which will cover the existing character 'a'.`  

---
## Intuition
For this problem we can take a look at simpler examples and analyze how we could optimize each scenario case by case.

Let's consider the following 2 cases:
> 1. "aaa"
>       - For the above case we can just print all characters in one go
> 2. "aba"
>       - For this case we can simply print all a's in one go and then print the b in the middle on its own
>

Notice how for both cases we could consider printing everything in one go when the first and last characters of a sequence matches up. With this information in mind we could approach this problem with dynamic programming because overlapping subproblem and optimal substructure. 

In terms of optimal substructure if we are given a string `s[start : end]` in order to get the minimal operation needed to print it we ask ourselves the question of what are the minimal ways for printing the remainder of the string from `s[start + 1 : end]`. In addition, since we have the option to print characters in a sequence in one go we also examine if there are optimal ways of printing `s[start : i]` and `s[i + 1: end]` if `s[start] == s[i]`.

In terms of overlapping subproblem, a subproblem like `dp(0, 6)` would need to compute `dp(6, 6), dp(5, 6), dp(4, 6), ...` so and so forth. When we do make splits in the string and compute the optimal moves for 2 halves of the string we would also eventually end up considering `dp(5, 6)` if we do split and consider `dp(0, 3) dp(4, 6)` if `s[0] == s[3]`.

One last observation to make is that the number of operations need to print `'ab'` is the same as `aba`, which is why when we do encounter the case where `s[start] == s[i]` we just consider `dp(start, i) + dp(i + 1, end)`. If we include `i` in `dp(start, i + 1)` this can lead to us traversing the same solution over and over again.

The reason why we do `dp(start, i)` is because `s[start] == s[i]` therefore when we decide to split we want to only traverse from `s[start : i]` which excludes the character at `s[i]`, as we implicitly consider printing `s[i]` when we print `s[start]` because we print the same character from `s[start : i + 1]`. The subproblem of `dp(start, i)` will eventually reduce to `dp(start, start + 1)` at which point we would add 1 operation.

```
Consider `abaaa`
if we use dp(start, i + 1) for left split:

    0: dp(0, 3) 'aba'
        1: dp(0, 3) 'aba'
            2: dp(0, 3) 'aba'
                3: dp(0, 3) 'aba'
                    ...
                    ...
                    ...

        1: dp(3, 3) '' -> return 0

    0: dp(3, 5) 'aa'
        1: dp(3, 5) 'aa'
            2: dp(3, 5) 'aa'
                3: dp(3, 5) 'aa'
                    ...
                    ...
                    ...

```

---
## Solution
```python
def strangePrinter(self, s: str) -> int:
    # What is the minimal number of operations needed to print characters from start to end?
    # [start, end - 1] index inclusive
    
    @cache
    def dp(start, end):
        if start >= end:
            return 0
        
        # Consider the naive case of printing every character from start to end with 1 operation each
        cur_min = 1 + dp(start + 1, end)
        
        # Iterate through current string and consider cases where we can minimize operations by printing characters in one go
        for i in range(start + 1, end):
            # If the start and end characters are the same we can consider printing them in one go
            if s[start] == s[i]:
                cur_min = min(
                    cur_min,
                    dp(start, i) + dp(i + 1, end)
                )
        return cur_min
    
    return dp(0, len(s))
```
---
## Runtime & Space Complexity
$N$ ~ being the size of `s`.  

Runtime Complexity:  
$\mathcal{O}(N ^ 3)$

There can be at most `start * end` number of recursive calls, but we would also need to traverse through the entire length of the string at each call to check for special printing operation.

Space Complexity:  
$\mathcal{O}(N ^ 2)$

The cache used to stored memoized results would contain at most `start * end` elements also.

---