# 624. Maximum Distance in Arrays
***Topics***: *Array, Greedy*  
***Difficulty***: <span style="color: #fac31d;">Medium</span>
<!-- green: #46c6c2, yellow: #fac31d, red: #f8615c-->
---
You are given `m` `arrays`, where each array is sorted in ascending order.

You can pick up two integers from two different arrays (each array picks one) and calculate the distance. We define the distance between two integers `a` and `b` to be their absolute difference `|a - b|`.

Return the maximum distance.

---
**Example 1:**  

Input: `arrays = [[1,2,3],[4,5],[1,2,3]]`  
Output: `4`  
Explanation: `One way to reach the maximum distance 4 is to pick 1 in the first or third array and pick 5 in the second array.`  


**Example 2:**  

Input: `arrays = [[1],[1]]`  
Output: `0`  

---
## Intuition
For this problem we can solve it with 2 different approaches. The first taking linear time and second taking $\mathcal{O}(N \cdot log(N))$ time. The main logic of this problem is to be able to match the minimal number possible with the maximal number possible and vice versa from two different arrays.

Firstly, a pair can be thought of as an element `a` from array `i` and an element `b` from array `j`. $(a_i, b_j) = (b_j,a_i)$ Therefore this means that we can just compare elements of array immediately to its right and not need to compare with arrays from before. This why a linear time solution is possible.

To get the maximal possible value from each array we want to compare the instance of subtracting absolute maximum value we have seen so far from the current array's minimal element at `arrays[0]` and the instance of subtracting the absolute minimal value we have seen so far from the current array's maximal element at `arrays[-1]`. This ensure that we get the maximal distance between elements. 

In addition we are also assured that the maximal and minimal values are from different arrays before. At the end of the loop we update the maximal and minimal values seen so far accordingly if the current arrays contains values larger or smaller. This makes sure that we update the extremes for making comparisons in the following arrays.

The second approach, would be to use a min and max heap that keep tracks of the minimal mins and the maximal maxes of every array. Our algorithm is responsible for matching each min to a correct max. To do this we can keep track of the array that each min and max comes from `(min_value, array_idx), (max_value, array_idx)`.

With this approach we have to consider 2 main scenarios:
- If current min and max are from different arrays -> We can just calculate result
- If they are from different arrays. This means that:
  - We can take the absolute difference of current min with the next max in the heap
  - We can also take the absolute different of the current max with the next min in the heap.

Then we can take the maxes of both results into account and iterate until either both heaps are empty and if we doing comparisons with each respective heaps next element we have to check if each heap is non empty first before popping from it. This is because we pop 1 element from the max heap and 1 element from min heap in each iteration. When we end up with only one element remaining in each heap if they happen to be from the same array. There would be no elements left to pop from each heap.

---
## Solution
```python
# Approach 1.
def maxDistance(self, arrays: List[List[int]]) -> int:
    ans = 0
    # We take the current min as the start of the first array
    # We take the current max as the end of the first array
    cur_min, cur_max = arrays[0][0], arrays[0][-1]

    for i in range(1, len(arrays)):
        ans = max(
            ans,
            max(
                abs(cur_min - arrays[i][-1]),
                abs(cur_max - arrays[i][0])
            )
        )
        cur_min = min(cur_min, arrays[i][0])
        cur_max = max(cur_max, arrays[i][-1])

    return ans


# Approach 2.
import heapq
def maxDistance(self, arrays: List[List[int]]) -> int:
    # We want to always find the minimal element and the maximal element
    # Cases to consider:
    # 1. Min and max exists in different arrays -> return diff
    # 2. Min and max exists in same array
    #    - Use min: Use another max
    #    - Use max: Use another min
    mins = [(nums[0], i) for i, nums in enumerate(arrays)]
    maxes = [(-nums[-1], i) for i, nums in enumerate(arrays)]
    heapq.heapify(mins)
    heapq.heapify(maxes)
    ans = 0
    while maxes and mins:
        smallest, s_arr = heapq.heappop(mins)
        largest, l_arr = heapq.heappop(maxes)
        if s_arr != l_arr:
            ans = max(ans, abs(smallest - (-largest)))
        else:
            # Consider case of using current smallest
            if maxes:
                next_largest, nl_arr = heapq.heappop(maxes)
                ans = max(ans, abs(smallest - (-next_largest)))
                heapq.heappush(maxes, (next_largest, nl_arr))
            # Consider case of using current largest
            if mins:
                next_smallest, ns_arr = heapq.heappop(mins)
                ans = max(ans, abs(-largest - next_smallest))
                heapq.heappush(mins, (next_smallest, ns_arr))
    return ans
```
---
## Runtime & Space Complexity
$N$ ~ being the length of input array `arrays`.  

Runtime Complexity: 
$\mathcal{O}(N)$

We are only iterating through the list of arrays once and making constant time operation at each iteration.

Space Complexity:  
$\mathcal{O}(1)$

No extra space is used other than storing the answer.

---